Hey guys, so we're going to be building this
app, this game Glitch Garden, mobile first
it's going to primarily be for the mobile,
we're not going to use the keyboard, just
tap and drag.
So we're going to look at mobile aspect ratios
and we'll go from there. It will also work
on the web, of course, by the way.
OK cool so what aspect ratios are mobile phones,
what is an aspect ratio it's, it's the width
divided by the height of the screen. So here's
a list of common aspect ratios so the iPads
tend to be 4:3 or in decimal four divided
by three is one point three and then you can
see up the list that the iPhones as they got
newer went from 4:3 to 3:2 and the latest
ones are 16:9 and so are the latest Android
devices.
So let's target this game at 16:9 at the very
widest and then let's also make sure that
it gracefully behaves at these lower resolutions.
So, what does that mean?How do we handle lower
resolutions?Well, you could just stretch everything
- it's really easy but very, very ugly. We
don't want to do that. We could have black
bars it's OK, you could put black bars along
the top and bottom if it's say an iPad and
it's quite square and you could have black
bars on the side maybe if it's really long
and thin like the iPhone 6 or 5. it's OKbut
only in extreme cases. We want to try and
do the third option which is to crop the edges,
being careful about what's lost.
What do I mean by being careful about what's
lost? Well in printing there's something called
quiet zones, that's what I'm going to call
it, quiet zones. If this is my background
image on my Splash Screen then the bits I've
highlighted in blue are quiet zones, they're
places where if we lost them it wouldn't really
matter - there's no text, there are no logos
and there's nothing particularly meaningful
- no offence to the artist who drew this - in
those areas. So that's what I mean by quiet
zones. So this is a 16:9 image, its the widest
on the list, and you can imagine that we could
squeeze in to a certain extent about what
I've shown without changing the meaning or
the feel of the picture at all so that's what
we're going to do.
So let's dive into Unity and take a look at
that.
So here we are and we have on our splash screen
this image and I said don't worry too much
about the scaling. Now we're going to think
about the scaling much more carefully so choose
your UI tool at th top left here or hit the
'T' Key on the keyboard.
Right, so,firstly it's good that your rect
transform has a scale of one in fact if you're
not sure just reset it. If that messes things
up like it just has with mine then that's
OK, we're going to need to set native size
and you're going to be pretty much back to
where you were.
Alright so that's set native size on the image
there. So a simple image with preserved aspect,
native size is where we're starting. This
is in terms of the image so it's a 1600 by
900 pixel unscaled transform for the image
sitting there.
Perfect so now let's look at the canvas in
the heirarchy. There it is, now what's that
doing? Well it's chopping the top and bottom
of the image off at the moment. Well there's
lots of different options here for the UI
scale mode, constant pixel size, scale with
screen size or constant physical size.
Well we're going to want to scale with screen
size so that as the screen size of our game
changes let's simulate this - pull out your
game window and try just moving it around
and see what it does; and the behaviours we
get. Let's just continue to look at the outline
of what these options do so canvas - remember
you can hit your little blue book there next
to canvas scaler script and it will open the
Unity docs for you and tell you all about
the canvas scaler so you can read that in
your own time or if you're having trouble
getting to sleep.
So I'm going to set my reference resolution
to the same as the image, 1600 by 900 that
was right; and then it's a question of what
match mode - do we match width and height
or do we go for shrink? So let's start taking
a look at the consequences of setting these
different screen match modes, I'm just going
to squeeze in my heirarchy on the left, I'm
going to detach my game window all together
and I'm going to make actually I'm going to
detach my scene window altogether let's just
make a real mess of Unity; make my scene pretty
small and then my game like this. OK now we
can kind of see everything that's going on.
Alright, so, let's try first the match width
or height option. You're welcome to just play
with this stuff yourself. Start with match
turned over to the width setting so you can
go between width and height. So if we have
it matched on width what's happening is that
as the screen aspect ratio changes it is going
to match the width but you see that it's cropping
the top and bottom off, you can see that both
in the preview and here so that's not ideal.
So if we were to go through our resolutions
like 4 by 3 we don't really want these blue
areas at the top and bottom here, these would
be nothing rendered. So the black area means
that my current screen size is different - my
current game size is different from this 4:3
that I've constrained and doesn't actually
change anything as long as I move it carefully,
and the blue is saying well your device is
4:3 so this entire blue box including the
background is 4:3, so the device would have
to render something like black, its actually
showing blue because of the camera background.
It's very helpful at the moment that the camera
background colour is different to this kind
of grey because it shows the difference.
So that's not really what we want, as we work
up through the resolutions, 16:10, all the
aspect ratios, that's not how we want it to
scale because we don't wand these bars at
the top and bottom.
If we were to scale match on height it would
be just as bad really, let's just take a look.
It's going to do something similar but now
we're going to have the same problem at the
other end, so if we go to 4:3 here it's OK,
as we go up through the aspect ratios we start
to get bars again so that's not right either.
So back to the canvas, try shrink to put you
out of your misery. If we shrink let's see
what happens now so go to 4:3; 4:3 looks OK
because it's chopping the sides off, you see
in the preview on the left here? Then as we
go up through the resolutions chopping less
and less of the sides off until we get to
16:9 that's the behaviour that we want. Don't
worry about the black bars, as I said that's
just because of how I've got my game windows
set. If we set this window to an actual 16:9
then you can see how it gracefully degrades
as we go down to the lower aspect ratios and
that's really nice, you get what we're doing
there and it's going to look like this on
an iPad and like this on an iPhone 6.
OK what else do we have to look at on the
canvas? Nothing really, that's kind of it.
So congratulations on that bit, what I want
to do is get my layout back to default because
this is looking horrible now... why does it
look weird like this? It's because I'm in
a 3D project I accidentally set my project
to be 3D. I could click 2D and then double
click canvas, and then we'd be back to normal
but I actually want to change my project from
3D to 2D so... edit, project settings, editor,
and then go down to default behaviour mode
2D. Perfect. So now if I mess up my windows
like this and go back to default it defaults
to 2D, I just have to frame my canvas. Alright,
awesome, so look it's time for a challenge
for you. We have sorted out the splash screen,
what I want you to do as a challenge is to
sort out the start screen now this includes
some text elements that I want to float sensibly
in the screen using the same paradigm as before,
the text basically wants to behave as if its
stuck to the image so treat the text, I want
the text to stay in the same relative space
in the image and I want all the text to be
on the outside of the quiet zones I want no
text in those quiet zones.
So get your start menu looking right now,
have a look at the manuals and I shall show
you how I do it and talk you through in a
moment.
Cool, welcome back, so pop over to your start
scene let's start setting this guy up. So
start with the image. Let's have a look now
we've got a source image here, my little component
is saying it's 1024 by 756 but don't trust
that if you were to go over to images and
right - click and reveal and have a look in
your image editor in my case I'm just going
to use preview you'll remember that this thing
is 1920 x 1080 well actually I want to adjust
the size of that straight away, so I'm going
for pixels 1600 x 900, scaling proportionally,
that's fine so re-save your image as 1600
x 900 so that it's the same as the other one
in fact I'm going to rename my image so that
it hasn't got a name that's incorrect, great.
Alright so just make sure you're using a 1600
x 900 image on there. Great now set native
size and the image will jump up to the size,
to its 1600 x 900. As long as its a simple
image with that preserved aspect at native
size then we're done with the image. Up to
the canvas. Your settings may be a little
different, don't worry. This is what we need.
Screen space overlay because we're overlaying
over the entire screen and that's all we need
there let's close that guy down. We want the
scale with screen size option as before. Ah
that's looking better, kind of snapping into
place. Reference resolution 1600 by 900, very
nice, screen mode shrink now if we do that
we should be almost in business, let's have
a look, this is the game window as it gets
thinner, and taller and wider, its pretty
much working lets just flip through some of
these aspects, these bars suggesting that
my window isn't set to 4:3 now we're losing
left and right here, this is what I mean about
quiet zones, have a look at your image. This
image does not have quiet zones on the left
and right because the glitch is inside the
blue bars and the fox is an important character.
So this screen let's treat it differently,
this screen, I don't want the sides to be
chopped off here, OK that's not how I want
it to work. Don't worry about the text by
the way for now let's just get the background
working. So this is not the scaling mode that
we want in this case, so let's try the expand
option let's see what that gives us if we
go to 4:3 what's happening? So remember the
grey is where the platform would be filling
in with black. Well, that would have to be
what we do, the iPad would look like that.
Then we move up to the next resolution or
aspect ratio and when we finally get to 16:9
it would look like that. Again down to the
iPad, black bars top and bottom. I think that
if we're going to have this glitch logo showing
like this which I'm perfectly happy with,
and our image working properly we're going
to have to use that mode so use the expand
mode here and it will work fine OK so that's
the difference between expand and shrink now
let's deal with the text OK I want the text
to stay in the same place on this guy regardless
of how my screen sizing is so lets get the
parameters of this text sorted first. What
I mean by that, don't worry about the pivot,
but just kind of lay the text out so I wouldn't
want any text encroaching on this tree so
that's the kind of size that I've got to work
with with the title text, something like that.
Now I'm just going to drag the font size up.
Glitch Garden. That looks pretty good. Yeah?
Glitch Garden. Fine, stop them pesky animals
well, OK they could be on a small screen so
let's align it on the left, think about the
maximum before you even expand it and now
expand your font up. Looks quite nice, its
kind of tapering with the tree right? We're
going to have an options button shortly as
well, but until we have an options button
let me just get the start and the quit buttons
working, start, quit left aligned well the
graphics designers amongst you might say that
we need to put some kind of panel behind here
but this is good enough for now, and I think
I'm going to use the same font size for start
and quit so I'm going to go to 62, OK, and
that's fine. So let's just take a look at
the game so far, run it through and see how
it's feeling.
Ouch, now I don't know about you but that
really hurt my ears, though let me show you
how to turn the sound down so you just click
on the load sound on the splash scene, 25%.
Loads automatically, nice! Glitch Garden,
start, we're chopping the start off OK again
let's detach the game and see how this scales.
How's the text that's OK, look how the text
is staying. It's staying in the same place
because of the way the anchors are set up
it's working fine. All I need to do now on
the start scene is give enough room in this
element, this UI element for the word start
and then that's all just fine so the anchoring
is all working OK just fine over here, we
don't have to worry about anything, we don't
have to change any of the overflow, of anything
else over here because the anchoring has just
worked fine, that's to do with these anchors
set up here; but by default they're working
fine.
If you're having a problem then play with
the anchoring system here, and with the anchoring
positions but you shouldn't need to. I think
you can get into this position now where regardless
of your aspect ratio, whether you're at 4:3
or all the way up at 16:9 the text stays where
it is on the image and the black bars came
in which kind of gives a movie feel to it.
So, congratulations on getting all that done
and I'll see you in the next video.